---
layout: post
title: "Why aren't things the way they should be?"
date: "2016-10-19 17:19:03 -0400"
summary: This a question that we ask, often. Reconciling the difference between the way things are and the way things should be is one of the big challenges we face as individuals and as a society.
categories:  update
---

# Why aren't things the way they should be?

One of the biggest challenges that we can face in life is reconciling the difference between the way things are and the way things should be. Often, we are clever enough to visualize the way things should be. This leads to immense frustration with the way things are. I have had to deal with this situation often and I am still dealing with this situation all the time.

Here are two techniques that I found effective in dealing with this situation:

* __“Be the change that you wish to see in the world.” - M. K. Ghandhi__
This is an extremely challenging response to the situation. Leading by example and living your life/doing things the way they should be done is an extremely good way to channel your frustration. In this way you are concentrating your energies into creating/planning/working on the change that you want to see, rather than giving vent to your frustrations or doing nothing.

*  __"God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
Courage to change the things I can,
And wisdom to know the difference." - The Serenity Prayer__
I used to carry these words around with me  and always kept a copy on my desk. It is clear and simple message for how to deal with many situations in your life. Read it and reflect on the wisdom in those lines.

Living life on your own terms, not accepting the status quo and being true to your core values is what makes life worth living. So do not be daunted by the magnitude of the change that needs to happen.
__"A journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step"  - Tao Te Ching__

### Things to do:

*  Take the time to think about your life and see if some of the conflict and stress you face is because of the difference between the way things are and the way they should be.
*  Think about what you could do to become the "change you seek"
*  Make a plan and take some active steps to create the change we make your world "the way it should be"
* Continue with your mindfulness practice so you can choose your response in the moment.
